<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-2-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Athens. A garden, with a castle in the background.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>I may depart with little, while I live; something I may cast to you, not much. Alas! the prison I keep, though it be for great ones, yet they seldom come: before one salmon, you shall take a number of minnows. I am given out to be better lined than it can appear to me report is a true speaker: I would I were really that I am delivered to be. Marry, what I have⁠—be it what it will⁠—I will assure upon my daughter at the day of my death.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>Sir, I demand no more than your own offer; and I will estate your daughter in what I have promised.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Well, we will talk more of this when the solemnity is past. But have you a full promise of her? when that shall be seen, I tender my consent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>I have, sir. Here she comes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler’s</b> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Your friend and I have chanced to name you here, upon the old business; but no more of that now: so soon as the court-hurry is over, we will have an end of it: i’ the meantime, look tenderly to the two prisoners; I can tell you they are princes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>These strewings are for their chamber. ’Tis pity they are in prison, and ’twere pity they should be out. I do think they have patience to make any adversity ashamed: the prison itself is proud of ’em; and they have all the world in their chamber.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>They are famed to be a pair of absolute men.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>By my troth, I think fame but stammers ’em; they stand a greise above the reach of report.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>I heard them reported in the battle to be the only doers.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>Nay, most likely; for they are noble sufferers. I marvel how they would have looked, had they been victors, that with such a constant nobility enforce a freedom out of bondage, making misery their mirth, and affliction a toy to jest at.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Do they so?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>It seems to me they have no more sense of their captivity than I of ruling Athens: they eat well, look merrily, discourse of many things, but nothing of their own restraint and disasters. Yet sometime a divided sigh, martyred as ’twere i’ the deliverance, will break from one of them; when the other presently gives it so sweet a rebuke, that I could wish myself a sigh to be so chid, or at least a sigher to be comforted.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>I never saw ’em.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>The duke himself came privately in the night, and so did they: what the reason of it is, I know not.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>, above.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Look, yonder they are! that’s Arcite looks out.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>No, sir, no; that’s Palamon: Arcite is the lower of the twain; you may perceive a part of him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Go to! leave your pointing: they would not make us their object: out of their sight!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>It is a holiday to look on them. Lord, the diffrence of men! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>, above.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>How do you, noble cousin?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>How do you, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, strong enough to laugh at misery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bear the chance of war yet. We are prisoners</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fear for ever, cousin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I believe it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to that destiny have patiently</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Laid up my hour to come.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, cousin Arcite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where is Thebes now? where is our noble country?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where are our friends and kindreds? Never more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must we behold those comforts; never see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The hardy youths strive for the games of honour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hung with the painted favours of their ladies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like tall ships under sail; then start amongst ’em,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as an east wind, leave ’em all behind us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like lazy clouds, whilst Palamon and Arcite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even in the wagging of a wanton leg,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Outstripp’d the people’s praises, won the garlands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere they have time to wish ’em ours. O, never</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall we two exercise, like twins of honour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our arms again, and feel our fiery horses</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like proud seas under us! Our good swords now⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Better the red-ey’d god of war ne’er wore⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ravish’d our sides, like age, must run to rust,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And deck the temples of those gods that hate us;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These hands shall never draw ’em out like lightning,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To blast whole armies, more!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, Palamon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those hopes are prisoners with us: here we are,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here the graces of our youths must wither,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like a too-timely spring; here age must find us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, which is heaviest, Palamon, unmarried;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sweet embraces of a loving wife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Loaden with kisses, arm’d with thousand Cupids,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall never clasp our necks; no issue know us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No figures of ourselves shall we e’er see,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To glad our age, and like young eagles teach ’em</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Boldly to gaze against bright arms, and say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Remember what your fathers were, and conquer!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fair-ey’d maids shall weep our banishments,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in their songs curse ever-blinded Fortune,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till she for shame see what a wrong she has done</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To youth and nature: this is all our world;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We shall know nothing here but one another;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear nothing but the clock that tells our woes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The vine shall grow, but we shall never see it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Summer shall come, and with her all delights,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But dead-cold winter must inhabit here still.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis too true, Arcite. To our Theban hounds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That shook the aged forest with their echoes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more now must we holla; no more shake</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our pointed javelins, whilst the angry swine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Flies like a Parthian quiver from our rages,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Struck with our well-steel’d darts: all valiant uses⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The food and nourishment of noble minds⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In us two here shall perish; we shall die⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which is the curse of honour⁠—lastly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Children of grief and ignorance.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yet, cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even from the bottom of these miseries,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From all that fortune can inflict upon us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see two comforts rising, two mere blessings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If the gods please, to hold here a brave patience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the enjoying of our griefs together.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst Palamon is with me, let me perish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I think this our prison!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Certainly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis a main goodness, cousin, that our fortunes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were twinn’d together: ’tis most true, two souls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Put in two noble bodies, let ’em suffer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gall of hazard, so they grow together,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will never sink; they must not, say they could:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A willing man dies sleeping, and all’s done.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Shall we make worthy uses of this place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That all men hate so much?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>How, gentle cousin?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let’s think this prison holy sanctuary,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To keep us from corruption of worse men:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’re young, and yet desire the ways of honour;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, liberty and common conversation,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The poison of pure spirits, might, like women,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Woo us to wander from. What worthy blessing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can be, but our imaginations</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May make it ours? and here being thus together,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We are an endless mine to one another;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’re one another’s wife, ever begetting</span>
									<br/>
									<span>New births of love; we’re father, friends, acquaintance;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We are, in one another, families;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am your heir, and you are mine; this place</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is our inheritance; no hard oppressor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dare take this from us: here, with a little patience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We shall live long, and loving; no surfeits seek us;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The hand of war hurts none here, nor the seas</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swallow their youth. Were we at liberty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A wife might part us lawfully, or business;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quarrels consume us; envy of ill men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Crave our acquaintance; I might sicken, cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where you should never know it, and so perish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without your noble hand to close mine eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or prayers to the gods: a thousand chaunces,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were we from hence, would sever us.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You’ve made me⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I thank you, cousin Arcite⁠—almost wanton</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With my captivity: what a misery</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is to live abroad, and everywhere!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis like a beast, methinks: I find the court here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’m sure, a more content; and all those pleasures</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That woo the wills of men to vanity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see through now; and am sufficient</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tell the world ’tis but a gaudy shadow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That old Time, as he passes by, takes with him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What had we been, old in the court of Creon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where sin is justice, lust and ignorance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The virtues of the great ones? Cousin Arcite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had not the loving gods found this place for us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We had died as they do, ill old men, unwept,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And had their epitaphs, the people’s curses.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall I say more?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>I’d hear you still.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye shall.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is there record of any two that lov’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Better than we do, Arcite?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Sure, there cannot.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do not think it possible our friendship</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should ever leave us.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Till our deaths it cannot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And after death our spirits shall be led</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To those that love eternally. Speak on, sir.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b> and her <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</b> below.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This garden has a world of pleasures in’t.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What flower is this?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td>
							<td>’Tis call’d Narcissus, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That was a fair boy certain, but a fool,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To love himself: were there not maids enough?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Pray, forward.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Yes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>Or were they all hard-hearted?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td>
							<td>They could not be to one so fair.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>Thou wouldst not.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td>
							<td>I think I should not, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That’s a good wench!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But take heed to your kindness though!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td>
							<td>Why, madam?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>Men are mad things.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Will ye go forward, cousin?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>Canst not thou work such flowers in silk, wench?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td>
							<td>Yes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll have a gown full of ’em; and of these;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is a pretty colour: will’t not do</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rarely upon a skirt, wench?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td>
							<td>Dainty, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Cousin, cousin! how do you, sir? why, Palamon?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Never till now I was in prison, Arcite.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Why, what’s the matter, man?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Behold, and wonder!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By heaven, she is a goddess!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Ha!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do reverence;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She is a goddess, Arcite!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Of all flowers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methinks, a rose is best.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td>
							<td>Why, gentle madam?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is the very emblem of a maid:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For when the west wind courts her gently,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How modestly she blows, and paints the sun</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With her chaste blushes! when the north comes near her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rude and impatient, then, like chastity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She locks her beauties in her bud again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And leaves him to base briers.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yet, good madam,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sometimes her modesty will blow so far</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She falls for it: a maid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If she have any honour, would be loath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To take example by her.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>Thou art wanton.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>She’s wondrous fair!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>She’s all the beauty extant!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The sun grows high; let’s walk in. Keep these flowers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll see how near art can come near their colours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’m wondrous merry-hearted; I could laugh now.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td>
							<td>I could lie down, I’m sure.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>And take one with you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td>
							<td>That’s as we bargain, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>Well, agree then. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>What think you of this beauty?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>’Tis a rare one.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Is’t but a rare one?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Yes, a matchless beauty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Might not a man well lose himself, and love her?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cannot tell what you have done; I have,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beshrew mine eyes for’t! Now I feel my shackles.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>You love her, then?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Who would not?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>And desire her?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Before my liberty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>I saw her first.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>That’s nothing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>But it shall be.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>I saw her too.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Yes; but you must not love her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will not, as you do, to worship her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As she is heavenly and a blessed goddess;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I love her as a woman, to enjoy her:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So both may love.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>You shall not love at all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Not love at all! who shall deny me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I, that first saw her; I, that took possession</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First with mine eye of all those beauties in her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Reveal’d to mankind. If thou lovest her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or entertain’st a hope to blast my wishes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art a traitor, Arcite, and a fellow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>False as thy title to her: friendship, blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the ties between us, I disclaim,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou once think upon her!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, I love her;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if the lives of all my name lay on it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must do so; I love her with my soul.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If that will lose ye, farewell, Palamon!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I say again, I love; and, in loving her, maintain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am as worthy and as free a lover,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And have as just a title to her beauty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As any Palamon, or any living</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is a man’s son.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Have I call’d thee friend?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, and have found me so. Why are you mov’d thus?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me deal coldly with you: am not I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Part of your blood, part of your soul? you’ve told me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I was Palamon, and you were Arcite.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Yes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Am not I liable to those affections,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those joys, griefs, angers, fears, my friend shall suffer?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Ye may be.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, then, would you deal so cunningly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So strangely, so unlike a noble kinsman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To love alone? Speak truly; do you think me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unworthy of her sight?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No; but unjust</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou pursue that sight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Because another</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First sees the enemy, shall I stand still,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let mine honour down, and never charge?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Yes, if he be but one.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But say that one</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had rather combat me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let that one say so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And use thy freedom: else, if thou pursu’st her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be as that cursed man that hates his country,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A branded villain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>You are mad.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I must be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till thou art worthy, Arcite; it concerns me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in this madness, if I hazard thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And take thy life, I deal but truly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fie, sir!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You play the child extremely: I will love her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must, I ought to do so, and I dare;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all this justly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, that now, that now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy false self and thy friend had but this fortune,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be one hour at liberty, and grasp</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our good swords in our hands! I’d quickly teach thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What ’twere to filch affection from another!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art baser in it than a cutpurse:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Put but thy head out of this window more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as I have a soul, I’ll nail thy life to’t!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou dar’st not, fool; thou canst not; thou art feeble:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Put my head out! I’ll throw my body out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And leap the garden, when I see her next,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pitch between her arms, to anger thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No more! the keeper’s coming: I shall live</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To knock thy brains out with my shackles.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Do!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>By your leave, gentlemen.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Now, honest keeper?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lord Arcite, you must presently to the duke:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cause I know not yet.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>I’m ready, keeper.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Prince Palamon, I must awhile bereave you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of your fair cousin’s company.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And me too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even when you please, of life. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>.</i> Why is he sent for?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It may be, he shall marry her; he’s goodly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And like enough the duke hath taken notice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both of his blood and body. But his falsehood!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why should a friend be treacherous? if that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Get him a wife so noble and so fair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let honest men ne’er love again. Once more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would but see this fair one.⁠—Blessed garden,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fruit and flowers more blessed, that still blossom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As her bright eyes shine on ye! Would I were,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all the fortune of my life hereafter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yon little tree, yon blooming apricock!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How I would spread, and fling my wanton arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In at her window! I would bring her fruit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fit for the gods to feed on; youth and pleasure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still as she tasted, should be doubled on her;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if she be not heavenly, I would make her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So near the gods in nature, they should fear her;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then I’m sure she would love me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How now, keeper!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where’s Arcite?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Banish’d. Prince Pirithous</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Obtain’d his liberty; but never more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon his oath and life, must he set foot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon this kingdom.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> He’s a blessed man!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He shall see Thebes again, and call to arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bold young men that, when he bids ’em charge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fall on like fire: Arcite shall have a fortune,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he dare make himself a worthy lover,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet in the field to strike a battle for her;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if he lose her then, he’s a cold coward:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How bravely may he bear himself to win her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he be noble Arcite, thousand ways!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were I at liberty, I would do things</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of such a virtuous greatness, that this lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This blushing virgin, should take manhood to her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And seek to ravish me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, for you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have this charge too⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>To discharge my life?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No; but from this place to remove your lordship:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The windows are too open.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Devils take ’em</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That are so envious to me! Pr’ythee, kill me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>And hang for’t afterward?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By this good light,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had I a sword, I’d kill thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Why, my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou bring’st such pelting scurvy news continually,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art not worthy life. I will not go.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Indeed, you must, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>May I see the garden?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>No.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Then I’m resolved I will not go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I must</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Constrain you, then; and, for you’re dangerous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll clap more irons on you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do, good keeper:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll shake ’em so, ye shall not sleep;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll make ye a new morris. Must I go?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>There is no remedy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> Farewell, kind window;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May rude wind never hurt thee!⁠—O my lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If ever thou hast felt what sorrow was,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dream how I suffer!⁠—Come, now bury me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The country near Athens.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Banish’d the kingdom? ’tis a benefit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A mercy, I must thank ’em for; but banish’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The free enjoying of that face I die for,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, ’twas a studied punishment, a death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beyond imagination! such a vengeance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, were I old and wicked, all my sins</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could never pluck upon me. Palamon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast the start now; thou shalt stay, and see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her bright eyes break each morning ’gainst thy window,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let in life into thee; thou shalt feed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the sweetness of a noble beauty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That nature ne’er exceeded, nor ne’er shall⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good gods, what happiness has Palamon!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Twenty to one, he’ll come to speak to her;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if she be as gentle as she’s fair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know she’s his; he has a tongue will tame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tempests, and make the wild rocks wanton. Come what can come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The worst is death; I will not leave the kingdom:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know mine own is but a heap of ruins,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And no redress there. If I go, he has her.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am resolv’d: another shape shall make me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or end my fortunes; either way, I’m happy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll see her, and be near her, or no more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter four <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Country-people</b>, and one with a garland before them.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Countryman</td>
							<td>My masters, I’ll be there, that’s certain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Countryman</td>
							<td>And I’ll be there.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Countryman</td>
							<td>And I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fourth Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, then, have with ye, boys! ’tis but a chiding:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let the plough play to-day; I’ll tickle’t out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the jades’ tails to-morrow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am sure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have my wife as jealous as a turkey:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that’s all one: I’ll go through, let her mumble.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Clap her aboard to-morrow night, and stoa her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all’s made up again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, do but put</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A feskue in her fist, and you shall see her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take a new lesson out, and be a good wench.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do we all hold against the Maying?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fourth Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hold!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What should ail us?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Countryman</td>
							<td>Arcas will be there.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And Sennois,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Rycas; and three better lads ne’er danc’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under green tree; and ye know what wenches, ha!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But will the dainty domine, the schoolmaster,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep touch, do you think? for he does all, ye know.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He’ll eat a hornbook, ere he fail: go to!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The matter is too far driven between</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Him and the tanner’s daughter, to let slip now;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And she must see the duke, and she must dance too.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fourth Countryman</td>
							<td>Shall we be lusty?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All the boys in Athens</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blow wind i’ the breech on us: and here I’ll be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there I’ll be, for our town, and here again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there again: ha, boys, heigh for the weavers!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Countryman</td>
							<td>This must be done i’ the woods.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fourth Countryman</td>
							<td>O, pardon me!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By any means; our thing of learning says so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where he himself will edify the duke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most parlously in our behalfs: he’s excellent i’ the woods;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bring him to the plains, his learning makes no cry.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We’ll see the sports; then every man to’s tackle!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, sweet companions, let’s rehearse by any means,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the ladies see us, and do sweetly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And God knows what may come on’t.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fourth Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Content: the sports</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once ended, we’ll perform. Away, boys, and hold!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>By your leaves, honest friends; pray you, whither go you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fourth Countryman</td>
							<td>Whither! why, what a question’s that!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, ’tis a question</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To me that know not.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Countryman</td>
							<td>To the games, my friend.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Countryman</td>
							<td>Where were you bred, you know it not?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not far, sir.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are there such games to-day?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, marry, are there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And such as you never saw: the duke himself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will be in person there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>What pastimes are they?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Countryman</td>
							<td>Wrestling and running.⁠—’Tis a pretty fellow.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Countryman</td>
							<td>Thou wilt not go along?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Not yet, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fourth Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take your own time.⁠—Come, boys.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My mind misgives me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This fellow has a vengeance trick o’ the hip;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mark how his body’s made for’t</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll be hang’d though,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he dare venture; hang him, plum-porridge!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He wrestle? he roast eggs! Come, let’s be gone, lads. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countrymen</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This is an offer’d opportunity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I durst not wish for. Well I could have wrestled,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The best men call’d it excellent; and run</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swifter than wind upon a field of corn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Curling the wealthy ears, nev’r flew. I’ll venture,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in some poor disguise be there: who knows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether my brows may not be girt with garlands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And happiness prefer me to a place</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where I may ever dwell in sight of her? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Athens. A room in the prison.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler’s</b> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why should I love this gentleman? ’tis odds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He never will affect me: I am base,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father the mean keeper of his prison,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he a prince: to marry him is hopeless,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be his whore is witless. Out upon’t!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What pushes are we wenches driven to,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When fifteen once has found us! First, I saw him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, seeing, thought he was a goodly man;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He has as much to please a woman in him⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he please to bestow it so⁠—as ever</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These eyes yet look’d on: next I pitied him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so would any young wench, o’ my conscience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ever dream’d, or vow’d her maidenhead</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To a young handsome man: then I lov’d him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Extremely lov’d him, infinitely lov’d him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet he had a cousin, fair as he too;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in my heart was Palamon, and there,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord, what a coil he keeps! To hear him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sing in an evening, what a heaven it is!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet his songs are sad ones. Fairer spoken</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was never gentleman: when I come in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bring him water in a morning, first</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He bows his noble body, then salutes me thus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Fair, gentle maid, good morrow: may thy goodness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Get thee a happy husband!” Once he kiss’d me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I lov’d my lips the better ten days after:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would he would do so every day! He grieves much,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And me as much to see his misery:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What should I do, to make him know I love him?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I would fain enjoy him say I ventur’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To set him free? what says the law, then? Thus much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For law, or kindred! I will do it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this night or to-morrow he shall love me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p>An open place in Athens.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A short flourish of cornets, and shouts within. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>, as a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countryman</b>, wearing a garland; and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Country-people</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You have done worthily; I have not seen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since Hercules, a man of tougher sinews:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whate’er you are, you run the best, and wrestle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That these times can allow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>I’m proud to please you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>What country bred you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>This; but far off, prince.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>Are you a gentleman?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My father said so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to those gentle uses gave me life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>Are you his heir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>His youngest, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sure, is a happy sire then. What proves you?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A little of all noble qualities:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I could have kept a hawk, and well have holla’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To a deep cry of dogs; I dare not praise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My feat in horsemanship, yet they that knew me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would say it was my best piece; last and greatest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would be thought a soldier.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>You are perfect.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>Upon my soul, a proper man!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>He is so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>How do you like him, lady?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I admire him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have not seen so young a man so noble⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he say true⁠—of his sort.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Believe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His mother was a wondrous handsome woman;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His face methinks goes that way.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But his body</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fiery mind illustrate a brave father.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mark how his virtue, like a hidden sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Breaks through his baser garments!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td>He’s well got, sure.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>What made you seek this place, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Noble Theseus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To purchase a name, and do my ablest service</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To such a well-found wonder as thy worth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For only in thy court, of all the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dwells fair-ey’d Honour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>All his words are worthy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, we are much indebted to your travel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor shall you lose your wish.⁠—Pirithous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dispose of this fair gentleman.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thanks, Theseus.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whate’re you are, you’re mine; and I shall give you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To a most noble service⁠—to this lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This bright young virgin: pray, observe her goodness:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’ve honour’d her fair birthday with your virtues,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as your due, you’re hers; kiss her fair hand, sir.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, you’re a noble giver.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>.</i> Dearest beauty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus let me seal my vow’d faith. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses her hand.</i> When your servant⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your most unworthy creature⁠—but offends you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Command him die, he shall.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That were too cruel.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you deserve well, sir, I shall soon see it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’re mine; and somewhat better than your rank I’ll use you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll see you furnish’d: and because you say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are a horseman, I must needs entreat you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This afternoon to ride; but ’tis a rough one.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I like him better, prince; I shall not, then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Freeze in my saddle.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet, you must be ready⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you, Emilia⁠—and you, friend⁠—and all⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-morrow by the sun, to do observance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To flowery May, in Dian’s wood.⁠—Wait well, sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon your mistress.⁠—Emily, I hope</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He shall not go afoot.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That were a shame, sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While I have horses.⁠—Take your choice; and what</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You want at any time, let me but know it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you serve faithfully, I dare assure you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’ll find a loving mistress.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If I do not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me find that my father ever hated⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Disgrace and blows.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, lead the way; you’ve won it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It shall be so: you shall receive all dues</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fit for the honour you have won; ’twere wrong else.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sister, beshrew my heart, you have a servant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, if I were a woman, would be master:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But you are wise.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>I hope too wise for that, sir. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Athens. Before the prison.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler’s</b> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let all the dukes and all the devils roar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He is at liberty: I’ve ventur’d for him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And out I’ve brought him to a little wood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A mile hence: I have sent him, where a cedar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Higher than all the rest, spreads like a plane,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fast by a brook; and there he shall keep close,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till I provide him files and food; for yet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His iron bracelets are not off. O Love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What a stout-hearted child thou art! My father</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Durst better have endur’d cold iron than done it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I love him beyond love and beyond reason,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or wit, or safety; I have made him know it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I care not: I am desperate; if the law</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Find me, and then condemn me for’t, some wenches,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some honest-hearted maids, will sing my dirge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tell to memory my death was noble,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dying almost a martyr. That way he takes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I purpose is my way too: sure he cannot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be so unmanly as to leave me here:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he do, maids will not so easily</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Trust men again: and yet he has not thank’d me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what I’ve done; no, not so much as kiss’d me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that, methinks, is not so well; nor scarcely</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could I persuade him to become a freeman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He made such scruples of the wrong he did</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To me and to my father. Yet, I hope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When he considers more, this love of mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will take more root within him: let him do</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What he will with me, so he use me kindly;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For use me so he shall, or I’ll proclaim him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to his face, no man. I’ll presently</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Provide him necessaries, and pack my clothes up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And where there is a patch of ground I’ll venture,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So he be with me: by him, like a shadow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll ever dwell. Within this hour the whoobub</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will be all o’er the prison: I am then</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kissing the man they look for. Farewell, father!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Get many more such prisoners and such daughters,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shortly you may keep yourself. Now to him! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
