<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Athens. Before a temple.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Hymen with a torch burning; a Boy, in a white robe, before, singing and strewing flowers; after Hymen, a Nymph, encompassed in her tresses, bearing a wheaten garland; then <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>, between two other Nymphs with wheaten chaplets on their heads; then <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>, the bride, led by <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</b>, and another holding a garland over her head, her tresses likewise hanging; after her, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>, holding up her train; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artesius</b> and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Song.</i>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Music.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span>Roses, their sharp spines being gone,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Not royal in their smells alone,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">But in their hue.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Maiden pinks, of odour faint,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Daisies smell-less, yet most quaint,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And sweet thyme true.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>Primrose, first-born child of <i xml:lang="la">Ver</i>,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Merry spring-time’s harbinger</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">With her bells dim.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Oxlips in their cradles growing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Marigolds on deathbeds blowing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Larks’-heels trim.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>All dear Nature’s children sweet,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Lie ’fore bride and bridegroom’s feet,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Blessing their sense! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Strewing flowers.</i></span>
										<br/>
										<span>Not an angel of the air,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Bird melodious, or bird fair,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Be absent hence!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>The crow, the slanderous cuckoo, nor</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The boding raven, nor chough hoar</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Nor chatt’ring pie,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>May on our bride-house perch or sing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Or with them any discord bring,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">But from it fly!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter three <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queens</b>, in black, with veils stained, and wearing imperial crowns. The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">First Queen</b> falls down at the foot of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>; the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Second</b> falls down at the foot of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>; the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Third</b> before <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For pity’s sake and true gentility’s,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear, and respect me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For your mother’s sake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as you wish your womb may thrive with fair ones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear, and respect me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, for the love of him whom Jove hath mark’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The honour of your bed, and for the sake</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of clear virginity, be advocate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For us and our distresses! This good deed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall raze you out o’ the book of trespasses</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All you are set down there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>Sad lady, rise.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td>Stand up.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No knees to me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What woman I may stead that is distress’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Does bind me to her.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>What’s your request? deliver you for all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We are three queens, whose sovereigns fell before</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wrath of cruel Creon; who endure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The beaks of ravens, talons of the kites,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pecks of crows, in the foul fields of Thebes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He will not suffer us to burn their bones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To urn their ashes, nor to take th’ offence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of mortal loathsomeness from the blest eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of holy Phoebus, but infects the winds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With stench of our slain lords. O, pity, duke!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou purger of the earth, draw thy fear’d sword</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That does good turns to the world; give us the bones</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of our dead kings, that we may chapel them;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, of thy boundless goodness, take some note</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That for our crowned heads we have no roof</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save this, which is the lion’s and the bear’s,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And vault to everything!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pray you, kneel not:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I was transported with your speech, and suffer’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your knees to wrong themselves. I’ve heard the fortunes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of your dead lords, which gives me such lamenting</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As wakes my vengeance and revenge for ’em.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King Capaneus was your lord: the day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he should marry you, at such a season</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As now it is with me, I met your groom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By Mars’s altar; you were that time fair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not Juno’s mantle fairer than your tresses,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor in more bounty spread her; your wheaten wreath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was then nor thrash’d nor blasted; Fortune at you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dimpled her cheek with smiles; Hercules our kinsman⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then weaker than your eyes⁠—laid by his club;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He tumbled down upon his Nemean hide,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And swore his sinews thaw’d. O, grief and time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fearful consumers, you will all devour!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, I hope some god,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some god hath put his mercy in your manhood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereto he’ll infuse power, and press you forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our undertaker!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, no knees, none, widow!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto the helmeted Bellona use them,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pray for me, your soldier.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Troubled I am. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turns away.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Honour’d Hippolyta,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most dreaded Amazonian, that hast slain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The scythe-tusk’d boar; that, with thy arm as strong</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As it is white, wast near to make the male</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To thy sex captive, but that this thy lord⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Born to uphold creation in that honour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First Nature styl’d it in⁠—shrunk thee into</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bound thou wast o’erflowing, at once subduing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy force and thy affection; soldieress,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That equally canst poise sternness with pity;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who now, I know, hast much more power on him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than e’er he had on thee; who ow’st his strength</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And his love too, who is a servant for</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The tenor of thy speech; dear glass of ladies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bid him that we, whom flaming War doth scorch,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under the shadow of his sword may cool us;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Require him he advance it o’er our heads;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak’t in a woman’s key, like such a woman</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As any of us three; weep ere you fail;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lend us a knee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But touch the ground for us no longer time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than a dove’s motion when the head’s pluck’d off;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell him, if he i’ the blood-siz’d field lay swoln,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Showing the sun his teeth, grinning at the moon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What you would do!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Poor lady, say no more:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I had as lief trace this good action with you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As that whereto I’m going, and nev’r yet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Went I so willing, way. My lord is taken</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heart-deep with your distress: let him consider;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll speak anon.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>.</i> O, my petition was</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set down in ice, which, by hot grief uncandied,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Melts into drops; so sorrow, wanting form,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is press’d with deeper matter.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pray, stand up:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your grief is written in your cheek.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, woe!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You cannot read it there; there through my tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like wrinkled pebbles in a glassy stream,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may behold ’em. Lady, lady, alack!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He that will all the treasure know o’ th’ earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must know the centre too; he that will fish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For my least minnow, let him lead his line</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To catch one at my heart. O, pardon me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Extremity, that sharpens sundry wits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes me a fool.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pray you, say nothing; pray you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who cannot feel nor see the rain, being in’t,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knows neither wet nor dry. If that you were</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ground-piece of some painter, I would buy you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>T’instruct me ’gainst a capital grief indeed;⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such heart-pierc’d demonstration!⁠—but, alas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being a natural sister of our sex,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your sorrow beats so ardently upon me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it shall make a counter-reflect ’gainst</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My brother’s heart, and warm it to some pity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though it were made of stone: pray have good comfort.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Forward to th’ temple! leave not out a jot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O’ the sacred ceremony.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, this celebration</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will longer last, and be more costly, than</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your suppliant’s war! Remember that your fame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knolls in th’ ear o’ the world: what you do quickly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not done rashly; your first thought is more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than others’ labour’d meditance; your premeditating</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than their actions; but⁠—O Jove!⁠—your actions,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Soon as they move, as asprayes do the fish,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Subdue before they touch: think, dear duke, think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What beds our slain kings have!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What griefs our beds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That our dear lords have none!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>None fit for the dead!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those that with cords, knives, drams, precipitance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weary of this world’s light, have to themselves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Been death’s most horrid agents, humane grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Affords them dust and shadow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But our lords</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lie blistering ’fore the visitating sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And were good kings when living.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is true;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will give you comfort,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give your dead lords graves: the which to do</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must make some work with Creon.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And that work</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Presents itself to the doing:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now ’twill take form; the heats are gone to-morrow;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then bootless toil must recompense itself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With its own sweat; now he is secure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not dreams we stand before your puissance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wrinching our holy begging in our eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make petition clear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now you may take him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Drunk with his victory.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And his army full</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of bread and sloth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Artesius, that best know’st</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How to draw out fit to this enterprise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prim’st for this proceeding, and the number</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To carry such a business; forth and levy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our worthiest instruments; whilst we despatch</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This grand act of our life, this daring deed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of fate in wedlock.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dowagers, take hands;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let us be widows to our woes; delay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commends us to a famishing hope.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All Queens</td>
							<td>Farewell!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We come unseasonably; but when could grief</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cull forth, as unpang’d judgment can, fitt’st time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For best solicitation?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, good ladies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is a service, whereto I am going,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Greater than any war; it more imports me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than all the actions that I have foregone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or futurely can cope.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The more proclaiming</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our suit shall be neglected: when her arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Able to lock Jove from a synod, shall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By warranting moonlight corslet thee, O, when</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her twinning cherries shall their sweetness fall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon thy tasteful lips, what wilt thou think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of rotten kings or blubber’d queens? what care</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what thou feel’st not, what thou feel’st being able</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make Mars spurn his drum? O, if thou couch</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But one night with her, every hour in’t will</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take hostage of thee for a hundred, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt remember nothing more than what</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That banquet bids thee to!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Though much unlike <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">kneeling</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>You should be so transported, as much sorry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I should be such a suitor; yet I think,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did I not by th’ abstaining of my joy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which breeds a deeper longing, cure their surfeit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That craves a present medicine, I should pluck</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All ladies’ scandal on me: therefore, sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I shall here make trial of my prayers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either presuming them to have some force,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or sentencing for aye their vigour dumb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prorogue this business we are going about, and hang</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your shield afore your heart, about that neck</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which is my fee, and which I freely lend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do these poor queens service.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All Queens</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>.</i> O, help now!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our cause cries for your knee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If you grant not <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">kneeling</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>My sister her petition, in that force,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With that celerity and nature, which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She makes it in, from henceforth I’ll not dare</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ask you anything, nor be so hardy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ever to take a husband.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pray, stand up:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am entreating of myself to do</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That which you kneel to have me.⁠—Pirithous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lead on the bride: get you and pray the gods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For success and return; omit not anything</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In the pretended celebration.⁠—Queens,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Follow your soldier.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artesius</b>.</i> As before, hence you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And at the banks of Aulis meet us with</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The forces you can raise, where we shall find</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The moiety of a number, for a business</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More bigger look’d.⁠—Since that our theme is haste,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I stamp this kiss upon thy currant lip; <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet, keep it as my token.⁠—Set you forward;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I will see you gone.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artesius</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell, my beauteous sister.⁠—Pirithous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep the feast full; bate not an hour on’t.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll follow you at heels: the feast’s solemnity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall want till your return.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Cousin, I charge you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Budge not from Athens; We shall be returning</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere you can end this feast, of which, I pray you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make no abatement. Once more, farewell all.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thus dost thou still make good</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The tongue o’ the world.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And earn’st a deity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Equal with Mars.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If not above him; for</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou, being but mortal, mak’st affections bend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To godlike honours; they themselves, some say,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Groan under such a mastery.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As we are men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus should we do; being sensually subdu’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We lose our humane title. Good cheer, ladies!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now turn we towards your comforts. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Thebes. The court of the palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dear Palamon, dearer in love than blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And our prime cousin, yet unharden’d in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The crimes of nature; let us leave the city</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thebes, and the temptings in’t, before we further</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sully our gloss of youth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here to keep in abstinence we shame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As in incontinence; for not to swim</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ th’ aide o’ the current, were almost to sink,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At least to frustrate striving; and to follow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The common stream, ’twould bring us to an eddy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where we should turn or drown; if labour through,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our gain but life and weakness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your advice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is cried up with example: what strange ruins,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since first we went to school, may we perceive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Walking in Thebes! scars and bare weeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gain o’ the martialist, who did propound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To his bold ends honour and golden ingots,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, though he won, he had not; and now flurted</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By peace, for whom he fought! Who, then, shall offer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Mars’s so-scorn’d altar? I do bleed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When such I meet, and wish great Juno would</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Resume her ancient fit of jealousy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To get the soldier work, that peace might purge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For her repletion, and retain anew</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her charitable heart, now hard, and harsher</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than strife or war could be.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Are you not out?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meet you no ruin but the soldier in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cranks and turns of Thebes? You did begin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if you met decays of many kinds:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perceive you none that do arouse your pity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But the unconsider’d soldier?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes; I pity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Decays where’er I find them; but such most</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, sweating in an honourable toil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are paid with ice to cool ’em.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis not this</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I did begin to speak of; this is virtue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of no respect in Thebes: I spake of Thebes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How dangerous, if we will keep our honours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is for our residing; where every evil</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath a good colour; where every seeming good’s</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A certain evil; where not to be even jump</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As they are here, were to be strangers, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such things to be, mere monsters.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis in our power⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless we fear that apes can tutor’s⁠—to</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be masters of our manners: what need I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Affect another’s gait, which is not catching</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where there is faith? or to be fond upon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Another’s way of speech, when by mine own</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I may be reasonably conceiv’d, sav’d too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speaking it truly? why am I bound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By any generous bond to follow him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Follows his tailor, haply so long until</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The follow’d make pursuit? or let me know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why mine own barber is unblest, with him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My poor chin too, for ’tis not scissar’d just</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To such a favourite’s glass? what canon is there</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That does command my rapier from my hip,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dangle ’t in my hand, or to go tip-toe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the street be foul? Either I am</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fore-horse in the team, or I am none</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That draw i’ the sequent trace. These poor slight sores</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Need not a plantain; that which rips my bosom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Almost to th’ heart, ’s⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Our Uncle Creon.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A most unbounded tyrant, whose successes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes heaven unfear’d, and villainy assur’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beyond its power there’s nothing; almost puts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Faith in a fever, and deifies alone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Voluble chance; who only attributes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The faculties of other instruments</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To his own nerves and act; commands men service,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what they win in’t, boot and glory; one</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That fears not to do harm: good, dares not; let</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The blood of mine that’s sibbe to him be suck’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From me with leeches; let them break and fall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Off me with that corruption!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Clear-spirited cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s leave his court, that we may nothing share</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of his loud infamy; for our milk</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will relish of the pasture, and we must</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be vile or disobedient; not his kinsmen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In blood, unless in quality.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nothing truer:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I think the echoes of his shames have deaf’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ears of heavenly justice: widdows’ cries</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Descend again into their throats, and have not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Due audience of the gods.⁠—Valerius!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Valerius</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valerius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The king calls for you; yet be leaden-footed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till his great rage be off him: Phoebus when</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He broke his whipstock, and exclaim’d against</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The horses of the sun, but whisper’d, to</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The loudness of his fury.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Small winds shake him!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But what’s the matter?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valerius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Theseus⁠—who where he threats appals⁠—hath sent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deadly defiance to him, and pronounces</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ruin to Thebes; who is at hand to seal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The promise of his wrath.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let him approach:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that we fear the gods in him, he brings not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A jot of terror to us: yet what man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thirds his own worth⁠—the case is each of ours⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When that his action’s dregg’d with mind assur’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis bad he goes about?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Leave that unreason’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our services stand now for Thebes, not Creon:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, to be neutral to him were dishonour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rebellious to oppose; therefore we must</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With him stand to the mercy of our fate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who hath bounded our last minute.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So we must.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is’t said this war’s afoot? or it shall be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On fail of some condition?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Valerius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis in motion;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Th’ intelligence of state came in the instant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With the defier.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let’s to the king; who, were he</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A quarter carrier of that honour which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His enemy come in, the blood we venture</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should be as for our health; which were not spent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rather laid out for purchase: but, alas!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our hands advanc’d before our hearts, what will</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fall o’ the stroke do damage?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let th’ event</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That never-erring arbitrator, tell us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When we know all ourselves; and let us follow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The becking of our chance. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Before the gates of Athens.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>No further!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, farewell: repeat my wishes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To our great lord, of whose success I dare not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make any timorous question; yet I wish him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Excess and overflow of power, an’t might be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dare ill-dealing fortune. Speed to him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Store never hurts good governors.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Though I know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His ocean needs not my poor drops, yet they</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must yield their tribute there. My precious maid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those best affections that the heavens infuse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In their best-temper’d pieces, keep enthron’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In your dear heart!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thanks, sir. Remember me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To our all-royal brother; for whose speed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The great Bellona I’ll solicit; and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since, in our terrene state petitions are not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without gifts understood, I’ll offer to her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What I shall be advis’d she likes. Our hearts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are in his army, in his tent.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In’s bosom.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We have been soldiers, and we cannot weep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When our friends don their helms, or put to sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or tell of babes broach’d on the lance, or women</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That have sod their infants in⁠—and after eat them⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The brine they wept at killing ’em: then, if</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You stay to see of us such spinsters, we</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should hold you here for ever.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peace be to you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I pursue this war! which shall be then</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beyond further requiring. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How his longing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Follows his friend! since his depart, his sports,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though craving seriousness and skill, pass’d slightly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His careless execution, where nor gain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made him regard, or loss consider; but</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Playing one business in his hand, another</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Directing in his head, his mind nurse equal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To these so differing twins. Have you observ’d him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since our great lord departed?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>With much labour;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I did love him for’t. They two have cabin’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In many as dangerous as poor a corner,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Peril and want contending; they have skiff’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Torrents, whose roaring tyranny and power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ the least of these was dreadful; and they have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fought out together, where death’s self was lodg’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet fate hath brought them off. Their knot of love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tied, weav’d, entangled, with so true, so long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with a finger of so deep a cunning,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May be out-worn, never undone. I think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Theseus cannot be umpire to himself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cleaving his conscience into twain, and doing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Each side like justice, which he loves best.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Doubtless</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is a best, and reason has no manners</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To say it is not you. I was acquainted</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once with a time, when I enjoy’d a play-fellow;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You were at wars when she the grave enrich’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who made too proud the bed, took leave of the moon⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which then look’d pale at parting⁠—when our count</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was each eleven.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td>’Twas Flavina.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You talk of Pirithous’ and Theseus’ love:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Theirs has more ground, is more maturely season’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More buckled with strong judgment, and their needs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The one or th’ other may be said to water</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their intertangled roots of love; but I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And she I sigh and spoke of, were things innocent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lov’d for we did, and like the elements</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That know not what nor why, yet do effect</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rare issues by their operance, our souls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did so to one another: what she lik’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was then of me approv’d; what not, condemn’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more arraignment; the flower that I would pluck</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And put between my breasts, O⁠—then but beginning</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To swell about the blossom⁠—she would long</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till she had such another, and commit it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the like innocent cradle, where, phoenix-like,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They died in perfume; on my head no toy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But was her pattern; her affections⁠—pretty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though happily her careless wear⁠—I follow’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For my most serious decking; had mine ear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stol’n some new air, or at adventure humm’d one</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From musical coinage, why, it was a note</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereon her spirits would sojourn⁠—rather dwell on⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sing it in her slumbers: this rehearsal⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, every innocent wots well, comes in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like old importments bastard⁠—has this end,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That the true love ’tween maid, and maid may be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than in sex dividual.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You’re out of breath;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this high-speeded pace is but to say,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you shall never, like the maid Flavina,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love any that’s call’d man.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>I’m sure I shall not.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, alack, weak sister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must no more believe thee in this point⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though in’t I know thou dost believe thyself⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than I will trust a sickly appetite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That loathes even as it longs. But, sure, my sister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I were ripe for your persuasion, you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have said enough to shake me from the arm</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the all-noble Theseus; for whose fortunes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will now in and kneel, with great assurance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we, more than his Pirithous, possess</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The high throne in his heart.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against your faith; yet I continue mine. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Cornets. Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A field before Thebes.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A battle struck within; then a retreat; flourish. Then enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b> (victor), <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</b>, and Attendants. The three <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queens</b> meet <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>, and fall on their faces before him.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Queen</td>
							<td>To thee no star be dark!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Both heaven and earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Friend thee for ever!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All the good that may</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be wish’d upon thy head, I cry Amen to’t!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Th’ impartial gods, who from the mounted heavens</span>
									<br/>
									<span>View us their mortal herd, behold who err,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in their time chastise. Go, and find out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The bones of your dead lords, and honour them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With treble ceremony: rather than a gap</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should be in their dear rites, we would supply’t.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But those we will depute which shall invest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You in your dignities, and even each thing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our haste does leave imperfect. So, adieu,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And heaven’s good eyes look on you! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queens</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b> borne in on hearses.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>What are those?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Men of great quality, as may be judg’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By their appointment; some of Thebes have told’s</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They’re sisters’ children, nephews to the king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By th’ helm of Mars, I saw them in the war⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to a pair of lions smear’d with prey⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make lanes in troops aghast: I fix’d my note</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Constantly on them; for they were a mark</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Worth a god’s view. What was’t that prisoner told me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I enquir’d their names?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We ’lieve, they’re called</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arcite and Palamon.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis right; those, those.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They are not dead?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nor in a state of life: had they been taken</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When their last hurts were given, ’twas possible</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They might have been recover’d; yet they breathe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And have the name of men.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then like men use ’em:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The very lees of such, millions of rates</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Exceed the wine of others: all our surgeons</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Convent in their behoof; our richest balms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rather than niggard, waste: their lives concern us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Much more than Thebes is worth: rather than have ’em</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Freed of this plight, and in their morning state,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sound and at liberty, I would ’em dead;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, forty thousand fold, we had rather have ’em</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prisoners to us than death. Bear ’em speedily</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From our kind air⁠—to them unkind⁠—and minister</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What man to man may do; for our sake, more:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since I have known frights, fury, friends’ behests,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love’s provocations, zeal, a mistress’ task,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Desire of liberty, a fever, madness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath set a mark⁠—which nature could not reach to</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without some imposition⁠—sickness in will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or wrestling strength in reason. For our love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And great Apollo’s mercy, all our best</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their best skill tender!⁠—Lead into the city;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where, having bound things scatter’d, we will post</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Athens ’for our army. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt; Attendants carrying <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Another part of the same, more remote from Thebes.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queens</b> with the hearses of their <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Knights</b>, in a funeral solemnity, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Song.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Urns and odours bring away!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Vapours, sighs, darken the day!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>Our dole more deadly looks than dying;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Balms, and gums, and heavy cheers,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Sacred vials fill’d with tears,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And clamours through the wild air flying!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i1">Come, all sad and solemn shows,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">That are quick-ey’d pleasure’s foes!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">We convent naught else but woes:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">We convent, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This funeral path brings to your household’s grave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Joy seize on you again! Peace sleep with him!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Queen</td>
							<td>And this to yours.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yours this way. Heavens lend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A thousand differing ways to one sure end.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This world’s a city full of straying streets,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And death’s the market-place, where each one meets. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt severally.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
