<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-5-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Athens. Three altars prepared, and inscribed severally to Mars, Venus, and Diana.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A flourish. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now let ’em enter, and before the gods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tender their holy prayers: let the temples</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Burn bright with sacred fires, and the altars</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In hallow’d clouds commend their swelling incense</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To those above us: let no due be wanting:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They have a noble work in hand, will honour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The very powers that love ’em.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>Sir, they enter.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A flourish of cornets. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>, and their <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Knights</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You valiant and strong-hearted enemies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You royal germane foes, that this day come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To blow that nearness out that flames between ye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lay by your anger for an hour, and dove-like</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the holy altars of your helpers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The all-fear’d gods, bow down your stubborn bodies:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your hire is more than mortal; so your help be!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as the gods regard ye, fight with justice:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll leave you to your prayers, and betwixt ye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I part my wishes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>Honour crown the worthiest! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b> and his Train.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The glass is running now that cannot finish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till one of us expire: think you but thus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, were there aught in me which strove to show</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine enemy in this business, were’t one eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against another, arm oppress’d by arm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would destroy th’ offender; coz, I would,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though parcel of myself: then from this gather</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How I should tender you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am in labour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To push your name, your ancient love, our kindred,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of my memory; and i’ the selfsame place</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To seat something I would confound: so hoist we</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sails, that must these vessels port even where</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The heavenly lymiter pleases.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You speak well.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before I turn, let me embrace thee, cousin:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This I shall never do again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>One farewell!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Why, let it be so: farewell, coz!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Farewell, sir! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They embrace.⁠—Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b> and his <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Knights</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knights, kinsmen, lovers, yea, my sacrifices,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>True worshippers of Mars, whose spirit in you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Expels the seeds of fear, and th’ apprehension</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which still is farther off it, go with me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the god of our profession: there</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Require of him the hearts of lions, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The breath of tigers, yea, the fierceness too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, the speed also⁠—to go on, I mean,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Else wish we to be snails: you know my prize</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must be dragg’d out of blood; force and great feat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must put my garland on, where she sticks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The queen of flowers; our intercession, then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must be to him that makes the camp a cestron</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brimm’d with the blood of men; give me your aid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bend your spirits towards him. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They advance to the altar of Mars, and fall on their faces; then kneel.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou mighty one, that with thy power hast turn’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Green Neptune into purple; whose approach</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comets prewarn; whose havoc in vast field</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unearth’d skulls proclaim; whose breath blows down</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The teeming Ceres’ foyzon; who dost pluck</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With hand armipotent from forth blue clouds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mason’d turrets; that both mak’st and break’st</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The stony girths of cities; me thy pupil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Young’st follower of thy drum, instruct this day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With military skill, that to thy laud</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I may advance my streamer, and by thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be styl’d the lord o’ the day;⁠—give me, great Mars,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some token of thy pleasure. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Here they fall on their faces as formerly, and there is heard clanging of armour, with a short thunder, as the burst of a battle, whereupon they all rise and bow to the altar.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>O great corrector of enormous times,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shaker of o’er-rank states, thou grand decider</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of dusty and old titles, that heal’st with blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The earth when it is sick, and cur’st the world</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O’ the pluresie of people; I do take</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy signs auspiciously, and in thy name</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To my design march boldly.⁠—Let us go. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b> and his <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Knights</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Our stars must glister with new fire, or be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-day extinct; our argument is love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which if the goddess of it grant, she gives</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Victory too: then blend your spirits with mine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You, whose free nobleness do make my cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your personal hazard: to the goddess Venus</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commend we our proceeding, and implore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her power unto our party. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They advance to the alter of Venus, and fall on their faces; then kneel.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hail, sovereign queen of secrets, who hast power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To call the fiercest tyrant from his rage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And weep unto a girl; that hast the might</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even with an eye-glance to choke Mars’s drum,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And turn th’ alarm to whispers; that canst make</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A cripple flourish with his crutch, and cure him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before Apollo; that may’st force the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be his subject’s vassal, and induce</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stale gravity to dance; the poul’d bach’lor⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose youth, like wonton boys through bonfires,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have skipt thy flame⁠—at seventy thou canst catch,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make him, to the scorn of his hoarse throat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Abuse young lays of love: what godlike power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou not power upon? to Phoebus thou</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Add’st flames, hotter than his; the heavenly fires</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did scorch his mortal son, thine him: the huntress</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All moist and cold, some say, began to throw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her bow away, and sigh: take to thy grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Me, thy vow’d soldier, who do bear thy yoke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ’twere a wreath of roses, yet is heavier</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than lead itself, stings more than nettles: I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have never been foul mouth’d against thy law;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ne’er reveal’d secret, for I knew none⁠—would not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had I kenn’d all that were; I never practis’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon man’s wife, nor would the libels read</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of liberal wits; I never at great feasts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sought to betray a beauty, but have blush’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At simpering sirs that did; I have been harsh</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To large confessors, and have hotly ask’d them,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If they had mothers? I had one, a woman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And women ’twere they wrong’d: I knew a man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of eighty winters⁠—this I told them⁠—who</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A lass of fourteen brided; ’twas thy power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To put life into dust; the aged cramp</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had screw’d his square foot round,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gout had knit his fingers into knots,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Torturing convulsions from his globy eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had almost drawn their spheres, that what was life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In him seem’d torture; this anatomy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had by his young fair fere a boy, and I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Believ’d it was his, for she swore it was,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And who would not believe her? Brief, I am</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To those that prate, and have done, no companion;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To those that boast, and have not, a defier;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To those that would, and cannot, a rejoicer:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, him I do not love, that tells close offices</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The foulest way, nor names concealments in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The boldest language; such a one I am,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And vow that lover never yet made sigh</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Truer than I. O, then, most soft sweet goddess,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me the victory of this question, which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is true love’s merit, and bless me with a sign</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of thy great pleasure. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Here music is heard, and doves are seen to flutter: they fall again upon their faces, then on their knees.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>O thou that from eleven to ninety reign’st</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In mortal bosoms, whose chase is this world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we in herds thy game, I give thee thanks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For this fair token; which being laid unto</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine innocent true heart, arms in assurance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My body to this business.⁠—Let us rise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bow before the goddess: time comes on. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They bow, then exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Still music of records. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b> in white, her hair about her shoulders, and wearing a wheaten wreath; one in white holding up her train, her hair stuck with flowers; one before her carrying a silver hind, in which is conveyed incense and sweet odours, which being set upon the altar of Diana, her Maids standing aloof, she sets fire to it; then they curtsy and kneel.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O sacred, shadowy, cold, and constant queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Abandoner of revels, mute, contemplative,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet, solitary, white as chaste, and pure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As wind-fann’d snow, who to thy female knights</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Allow’st no more blood than will make a blush,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which is their order’s robe; I here, thy priest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am humbled ’fore thine altar: O, vouchsafe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With that thy rare green eye⁠—which never yet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beheld thing maculate⁠—look on thy virgin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, sacred silver mistress, lend thine ear⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which nev’r heard scurril term, into whose port</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nev’r entered wanton sound⁠—to my petition,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Season’d with holy fear. This is my last</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of vestal office; I’m bride-habited,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But maiden-hearted: a husband I have ’pointed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But do not know him; out of two I should</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Choose one, and pray for his success; but I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am guiltless of election: of mine eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were I to lose one⁠—they are equal precious⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I could doom neither; that which perish’d should</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go to’t unsentenc’d: therefore, most modest queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He, of the two pretenders, that best loves me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And has the truest title in’t, let him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take off my wheaten garland, or else grant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The file and quality I hold I may</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Continue in thy band. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Here the hind vanishes under the altar, and in the place ascends a rose-tree, having one rose upon it.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>See what our general of ebbs and flows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out from the bowels of her holy altar</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With sacred act advances; but one rose!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If well inspir’d, this battle shall confound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both these brave knights, and I, a virgin flower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must grow alone, unpluck’d. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Here is heard a sudden twang of instruments, and the rose falls from the tree, which vanishes under the altar.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>The flower is fall’n, the tree descends.⁠—O mistress,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou here dischargest me; I shall be gather’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I think so; but I know not thine own will:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unclasp thy mystery.⁠—I hope she’s pleas’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her signs were gracious. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They curtsy, and exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Athens. A room in the prison.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</b> in the habit of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td>Has this advice I told you done any good upon her?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, very much; the maids that kept her company</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have half persuaded her that I am Palamon;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within this half-hour she came smiling to me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ask’d me what I’d eat, and when I’d kiss her:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I told her presently, and kiss’d her twice.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Twas well done: twenty times had been far better;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For there the cure lies mainly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then she told me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She’d watch with me to-night, for well she knew</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What hour my fit would take me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let her do so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when your fit comes, fit her home, and presently.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>She would have me sing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td>You did so?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>No.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Twas very ill done, then;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You should observe her every way.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have no voice, sir, to confirm her that way!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That’s all one, if ye make a noise:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If she entreat again, do anything;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lie with her, if she ask you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Hoa, there, doctor!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td>Yes, in the way of cure.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But first, by your leave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ the way of honesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That’s but a niceness;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ne’er cast your child away for honesty:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cure her first this way; then, if she’ll be honest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She has the path before her.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Thanke ye, doctor.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pray, bring her in,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let’s see how she is.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will, and tell her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her Palamon stays for her: but, doctor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methinks you are i’ the wrong still. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, go;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You fathers are fine fools: her honesty!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we should give her physic till we find that⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>Why, do you think she is not honest, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td>How old is she?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>She’s eighteen.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>She may be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that’s all one, ’tis nothing to our purpose:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whate’er her father says, if you perceive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her mood inclining that way that I spoke of,</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i xml:lang="la">Videlicet</i>, the way of flesh⁠—you have me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>Yes, very well, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Please her appetite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do it home; it cures her, <i xml:lang="la">ipso facto</i>,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The melancholy humour that infects her.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>I am of your mind, doctor.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td>You’ll find it so. She comes: pray, humour her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</b> and Maid.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come; your love Palamon stays for you, child,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And has done this long hour, to visit you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I thank him for his gentle patience;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He’s a kind gentleman, and I’m much bound to him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did you ne’er see the horse he gave me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Yes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>How do you like him?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>He’s a very fair one.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>You never saw him dance?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>No.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have often:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He dances very finely, very comely;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for a jig, come cut and long tail to him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He turns ye like a top.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>That’s fine indeed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He’ll dance the morris twenty mile an hour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that will founder the best hobby-horse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I have any skill, in all the parish;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And gallops to the tune of “Light o’ Love:”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What think you of this horse?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Having these virtues,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I think he might be brought to play at tennis.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>Alas, that’s nothing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Can he write and read too?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A very fair hand; and casts himself th’ accounts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all his hay and provender; that hostler</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must rise betime that cozens him. You know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The chestnut mare the duke has?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Very well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>She’s horribly in love with him, poor beast;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But he is like his master, coy and scornful.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>What dowry has she?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Some two hundred bottles,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And twenty strike of oats; but he’ll ne’er have her:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He lisps in’s neighing, able to entice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A miller’s mare; he’ll be the death of her.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td>What stuff she utters!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Make curtsy; here your love comes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pretty soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How do ye? That’s a fine maid; there’s a curtsy!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yours to command, i’ the way of honesty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How far is’t now to th’ end o’ the world, my masters?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td>Why, a day’s journey, wench.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>Will you go with me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>What shall we do there, wench?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, play at stool-ball:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What is there else to do?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am content,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If we shall keep our wedding there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis true;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For there, I will assure you, we shall find</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some blind priest for the purpose, that will venture</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To marry us, for here they’re nice and foolish;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Besides, my father must be hang’d to-morrow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that would be a blot i’ the business.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are not you Palamon?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>Do not you know me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes; but you care not for me: I have nothing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But this poor petticoat and two coarse smocks.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>That’s all one; I will have you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>Will you surely?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>Yes, by this fair hand, will I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>We’ll to bed, then.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>Even when you will. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses her.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>O, sir, you’d fain be nibbling.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>Why do you rub my kiss off?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis a sweet one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will perfume me finely ’gainst the wedding.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not this your cousin Arcite?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, sweetheart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I am glad my cousin Palamon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Has made so fair a choice.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>Do you think he’ll have me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td>Yes, without doubt.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>Do you think so too?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Yes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We shall have many children.⁠—Lord, how y’are grown!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Palamon I hope will grow, too, finely,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now he’s at liberty: alas, poor chicken,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He was kept down with hard meat and ill lodging;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I’ll kiss him up again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What do you here? you’ll lose the noblest sight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That e’er was seen.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>Are they i’ the field?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They are:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You bear a charge there too.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll away straight.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must even leave you here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, we’ll go with you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not lose the sight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>How did you like her?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll warrant you, within these three or four days</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll make her right again.⁠—You must not from her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But still preserve her in this way.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>I will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td>Let’s get her in.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, sweet, we’ll go to dinner;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then we’ll play at cards.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>And shall we kiss too?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>A hundred times.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>And twenty?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>Ay, and twenty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>And then we’ll sleep together?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Doctor</td>
							<td>Take her offer.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>Yes, marry, will we.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>But you shall not hurt me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Wooer</td>
							<td>I will not, sweet.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>If you do, love, I’ll cry. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A part of the forest near Athens, and near the place appointed for the combat.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</b>, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>I’ll no step further.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>Will you lose this sight?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I had rather see a wren hawk at a fly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than this decision: every blow that falls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Threats a brave life; each stroke laments</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The place whereon it falls, and sounds more like</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A bell than blade: I will stay here⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is enough my hearing shall be punish’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With what shall happen, ’gainst the which there is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No deafing, but to hear⁠—not taint mine eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With dread sights it may shun.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, my good lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your sister will no further.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, she must:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She shall see deeds of honour in their kind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which sometime show well, pencill’d: nature now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall make and act the story, the belief</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both seal’d with eye and ear. You must be present;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are the victor’s meed, the price and garland</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To crown the question’s title.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pardon me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I were there, I’d wink.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You must be there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This trial is as ’twere i’ the night, and you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The only star to shine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am extinct:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is but envy in that light, which shows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The one the other. Darkness, which ever was</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The dam of Horror, who does stand accurs’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of many mortal millions, may even now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By casting her black mantle over both,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That neither could find other, get herself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some part of a good name, and many a murder</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set off whereto she’s guilty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td>You must go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>In faith, I will not.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, the knights must kindle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their valour at your eye: know, of this war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are the treasure, and must needs be by</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give the service pay.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, pardon me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The title of a kingdom may be tried</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of itself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, well, then, at your pleasure:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those that remain with you could wish their office</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To any of their enemies.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Farewell, sister:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’m like to know your husband ’fore yourself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By some small start of time: he whom the gods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do of the two know best, I pray them he</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be made your lot. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all except <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b> and some of the Attendants.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Arcite is gently visag’d; yet his eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is like an engine bent, or a sharp weapon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In a soft sheath; mercy and manly courage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are bedfellows in his visage. Palamon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Has a most menacing aspect; his brow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is grav’d, and seems to bury what it frowns on;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet sometimes ’tis not so, but alters to</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The quality of his thoughts; long time his eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will dwell upon his object; melancholy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Becomes him nobly; so does Arcite’s mirth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But Palamon’s sadness is a kind of mirth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So mingled as if mirth did make him sad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sadness merry; those darker humours that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stick misbecomingly on others, on him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Live in fair dwelling. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Cornets; trumpets sound as to a charge, within.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hark, how yon spurs to spirit do incite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The princes to their proof! Arcite may win me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet may Palamon wound Arcite to</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The spoiling of his figure. O, what pity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enough for such a chance! If I were by,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I might do hurt; for they would glance their eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Toward my seat, and in that motion might</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Omit a ward, or forfeit an offence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which crav’d that very time: it is much better</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not there; O, better never born</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than minister to such harm. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Cornets; and a great cry of “A Palamon!” within.</i> What is the chance?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Servant</td>
							<td>The cry’s “A Palamon!”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then he has won. ’Twas ever likely:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He look’d all grace and success, and he is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doubtless the prim’st of men. I pry’thee, run</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tell me how it goes. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shouts; cornets; and cry of “A Palamon!” within.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Servant</td>
							<td>Still “Palamon!”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Run and inquire. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">First Servant</b>.</i> Poor servant, thou hast lost:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon my right side still I wore thy picture,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Palamon’s on the left: why so, I know not;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I had no end in’t else; chance would have it so:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On the sinister side the heart lies; Palamon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had the best-boding chance. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Another cry, and shout, and cornets, within.</i> This burst of clamour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is sure the end o’ the combat.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">First Servant</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Servant</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They said that Palamon had Arcite’s body</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within an inch o’ the pyramid, that the cry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was general “A Palamon!” but anon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Th’ assistants made a brave redemption, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The two bold tytlers at this instant are</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hand to hand at it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Were they metamorphos’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both into one⁠—O, why? there were no woman</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Worth so compos’d a man: their single share,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their nobleness peculiar to them, gives</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prejudice of disparity, values shortness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To any lady breathing. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Cornets; and cry of “Arcite, Arcite!” within.</i> More exulting?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Palamon” still?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Servant</td>
							<td>Nay, now the sound is “Arcite.”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I pr’ythee, lay attention to the cry;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set both thine ears to the business. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Cornets; and a great shout, and cry of “Arcite, victory!” within.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Servant</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The cry is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Arcite!” and “victory!” Hark: “Arcite, victory!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The combat’s consummation is proclaim’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the wind-instruments.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Half-sights saw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Arcite was no babe: God’s lid, his richness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And costliness of spirit look’d through him; it could</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more be hid in him than fire in flax,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than humble banks can go to law with waters</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That drift-winds force to raging. I did think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good Palamon would miscarry; yet I knew not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why I did think so: our reasons are not prophets,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When oft our fancies are. They’re coming off:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas, poor Palamon! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Cornets within.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b> as victor, Attendants, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lo, where our sister is in expectation,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet quaking and unsettled.⁠—Fairest Emily,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gods, by their divine arbitrament,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have given you this knight: he is a good one</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ever struck at head. Give me your hands:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Receive you her, you him; be plighted with</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A love that grows as you decay.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Emily,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To buy you I have lost what’s dearest to me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save what is bought; and yet I purchase cheaply,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I do rate your value.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O lov’d sister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He speaks now of as brave a knight as e’er</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did spur a noble steed: surely, the gods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would have him die a bach’lor, lest his race</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should show i’ the world too godlike: his behaviour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So charm’d me, that methought Alcides was</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him a sow of lead: if I could praise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Each part of him to th’ all I’ve spoke, your Arcite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did not lose by’t; for he that was thus good</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Encounter’d yet his better. I have heard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two emulous Philomels beat the ear o’ the night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With their contentious throats, now one the higher,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Anon the other, then again the first,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by-and-by out-breasted, that the sense</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could not be judge between ’em: so it far’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good space between these kinsmen; till heavens did</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make hardly one the winner.⁠—Wear the garland</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With joy that you have won.⁠—For the subdu’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give them our present justice, since I know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their lives but pinch ’em; let it here be done.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The scene’s not for our seeing: go we hence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Right joyful, with some sorrow.⁠—Arm your prize;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know you will not lose her.⁠—Hippolyta,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see one eye of yours conceives a tear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The which it will deliver.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is this winning?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O all you heavenly powers, where is your mercy?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that your wills have said it must be so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And charge me live to comfort this unfriended,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This miserable prince, that cuts away</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A life more worthy from him than all women,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I should and would die too.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Infinite pity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That four such eyes should be so fix’d on one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That two must needs be blind for’t!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>So it is. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-5-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same; a block prepared.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b> and his <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Knights</b> pinioned, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</b>, Executioner, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and Guard.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There’s many a man alive that hath outliv’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The love o’ the people; yea, i’ the selfsame state</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stands many a father with his child: some comfort</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We have by so considering; we expire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not without men’s pity; to live, still</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have their good wishes; we prevent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The loathsome misery of age, beguile</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gout and rheum, that in lag hours attend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For gray approachers; we come towards the gods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Young and unwapper’d, not halting under crimes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Many and stale; that, sure, shall please the gods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sooner than such, to give us nectar with ’em,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For we are more clear spirits. My dear kinsmen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose lives for this poor comfort are laid down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’ve sold ’em too too cheap.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Knight</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What ending could be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of more content? O’er us the victors have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fortune, whose title is as momentary</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As to us death is certain; a grain of honour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They not o’erweigh us.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Knight</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let us bid farewell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with our patience anger tottering Fortune,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, at her certain’st, reels.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Knight</td>
							<td>Come; who begins?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Even he that led you to this banquet shall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Taste to you all.⁠—Ah, ha, my friend, my friend!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your gentle daughter gave me freedom once;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’ll see’t done now for ever: pray, how does she?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I heard she was not well; her kind of ill</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gave me some sorrow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, she’s well restor’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to be married shortly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By my short life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am most glad on’t; ’tis the latest thing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I shall be glad of; pr’ythee, tell her so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commend me to her, and, to piece her portion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tender her this. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives purse.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Knight</td>
							<td>Nay, let’s be offerers all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Knight</td>
							<td>Is it a maid?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Verily, I think so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A right good creature, more to me deserving</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I can ’quite or speak of.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All the Knights</td>
							<td>Commend us to her. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Giving their purses.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler</td>
							<td>The gods requite you all, and make her thankful!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Adieu; and let my life be now as short</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As my leave-taking.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Knight</td>
							<td>Lead, couragious cousin.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All the Knights</td>
							<td>We’ll follow cheerfully. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b> lays his head on the block. A great noise, and cry of “Run, save, hold!” within.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b> in haste.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td>Hold, hold! O, hold, hold, hold!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</b> in haste.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hold, hoa! it is a cursed haste you made,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you have done so quickly.⁠—Noble Palamon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gods will show their glory in a life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou art yet to lead.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Can that be, when</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Venus I’ve said, is false? How do things fare?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Arise, great sir, and give the tidings ear <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b> rises.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>That are most dearly sweet and bitter.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath wak’d us from our dream?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>List, then. Your cousin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mounted upon a steed that Emily</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did first bestow on him⁠—a black one, owing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not a hair-worth of white, which some will say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weakens his price, and many will not buy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His goodness with this note; which superstition</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here finds allowance⁠—on this horse is Arcite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Trotting the stones of Athens, which the calkins</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did rather tell than trample; for the horse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would make his length a mile, if’t pleas’d his rider</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To put pride in him: as he thus went counting</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The flinty pavement, dancing as ’twere to the music</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His own hoofs made⁠—for, as they say, from iron</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Came music’s origin⁠—what envious flint,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cold as old Saturn, and like him possess’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With fire malevolent, darted a spark,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or what fierce sulphur else, to this end made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I comment not; the hot horse, hot as fire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Took toy at this, and fell to what disorder</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His power could give his will, bounds, comes on end,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forgets school-doing, being therein train’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And of kind manage; pig-like he whines</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At the sharp rowel, which he frets at rather</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than any jot obeys; seeks all foul means</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of boisterous and rough jadry, to dis-seat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His lord that kept it bravely: when nought serv’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When neither curb would crack, girth break, nor differing plunges</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Disroot his rider whence he grew, but that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He kept him ’tween his legs, on his hind hoofs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>… on end he stands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Arcite’s legs, being higher than his head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seem’d with strange art to hand: his victor’s wreath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even then fell off his head; and presently</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Backward the jade comes o’er, and his full poise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Becomes the rider’s load. Yet is he living;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But such a vessel ’tis that floats but for</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The surge that next approaches: he much desires</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have some speech with you. Lo, he appears.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b> in a chair.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O miserable end of our alliance!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gods are mighty.⁠—Arcite, if thy heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy worthy, manly heart, be yet unbroken,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me thy last words; I am Palamon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One that yet loves thee dying.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Take Emilia,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with her all the world’s joy. Reach thy hand:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell; I’ve told my last hour. I was false,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet never treacherous: forgive me, cousin.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One kiss from fair Emilia. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses her.</i>⁠—’Tis done:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take her. I die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Thy brave soul seek Elysium!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll close thine eyes, prince; blessed souls be with thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art a right good man; and, while I live,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day I give to tears.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>And I to honour.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In this place first you fought; even very here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I sunder’d you: acknowledge to the gods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our thanks that you are living.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His part is play’d, and, though it were too short,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He did it well; your day is lengthen’d, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The blissful dew of heaven does arrowze you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The powerful Venus well hath grac’d her altar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And given you your love; our master Mars</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath vouch’d his oracle, and to Arcite gave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The grace of the contention: so the deities</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have show’d due justice.⁠—Bear this hence.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we should things desire, which do cost us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The loss of our desire! that naught could buy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dear love but loss of dear love!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Never fortune</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did play a subtler game: the conquer’d triumphs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The victor has the loss; yet in the passage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gods have been most equal. Palamon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your kinseman hath confess’d the right o’ the lady</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did lie in you; for you first saw her, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even then proclaim’d your fancy; he restor’d her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As your stol’n jewel, and desir’d your spirit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To send him hence forgiven: the gods my justice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take from my hand, and they themselves become</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The executioners. Lead your lady off;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And call your lovers from the stage of death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom I adopt my friends. A day or two</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let us look sadly, and give grace unto</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The funeral of Arcite; in whose end</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The visages of bridegrooms we’ll put on,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And smile with Palamon; for whom an hour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But one hour since, I was as dearly sorry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As glad of Arcite, and am now as glad</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As for him sorry.⁠—O you heavenly charmers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What things you make of us! For what we lack</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We laugh, for what we have are sorry; still</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are children in some kind. Let us be thankful</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that which is, and with you leave dispute</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That are above our question.⁠—Let’s go off,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bear us like the time. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
