<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-3-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A forest near Athens.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Cornets in sundry places; noises and hollaing as of people a-Maying. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The duke has lost Hippolyta; each took</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A several land. This is a solemn rite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They owe bloom’d May, and the Athenians pay it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To th’ heart of ceremony. O Queen Emilia,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fresher than May, sweeter</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than her gold buttons on the boughs, or all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Th’ enamell’d knacks o’ the mead or garden! yea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We challenge to the bank of any nymph,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That makes the stream seem flowers; thou, O jewel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O’ the wood, o’ the world, hast likewise bless’d a place</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With thy sole presence! In thy rumination</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I, poor man, might eftsoons come between,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And chop on some cold thought! thrice-blessed chance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To drop on such a mistress, expectation</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most guiltless on’t. Tell me, O Lady Fortune⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Next after Emily my sovereign⁠—how far</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I may be proud? She takes strong note of me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath made me near her, and this beauteous morn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prim’st of all the year, presents me with</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A brace of horses; two such steeds might well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be by a pair of kings back’d, in a field</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That their crowns’ titles tried. Alas, alas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Poor cousin Palamon, poor prisoner! thou</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So little dream’st upon my fortune, that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou think’st thyself the happier thing, to be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So near Emilia; me thou deem’st at Thebes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therein wretched, although free: but if</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou knew’st my mistress breath’d on me, and that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I ear’d her language, liv’d in her eye, O coz,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What passion would enclose thee!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b> out of a bush, with his shackles: he bends his fist at <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Traitor kinsman!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shouldst perceive my passion, if these signs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of prisonment were off me, and this hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But owner of a sword. By all oaths in one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, and the justice of my love, would make thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A confess’d traitor! O thou most perfidious</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ever gently look’d! the void’st of honour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That e’er bore gentle token! falsest cousin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ever blood made kin! call’st thou her thine?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll prove it in my shackles, with these hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Void of appointment, that thou liest, and art</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A very thief in love, a chaffy lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor worth the name of villain! Had I a sword,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And these house-clogs away⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Dear cousin Palamon⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Cozener Arcite, give me language such</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thou hast show’d me feat!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not finding in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The circuit of my breast any gross stuff</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To form me like your blazon, holds me to</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This gentleness of answer: ’tis your passion</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thus mistakes; the which, to you being enemy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot to me be kind. Honour and honesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cherish and depend on, howsoe’er</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You skip them in me; and with them, fair coz,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll maintain my proceedings. Pray, be pleas’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To show in generous terms your griefs, since that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your question’s with your equal, who professes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To clear his own way with the mind and sword</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of a true gentleman.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>That thou durst, Arcite!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My coz, my coz, you have been well advertis’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How much I dare: you’ve seen me use my sword</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against th’ advice of fear. Sure, of another</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You would not hear me doubted, but your silence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should break out, though i’ the sanctuary.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ve seen you move in such a place, which well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might justify your manhood; you were call’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A good knight and a bold: but the whole week’s not fair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If any day it rain. Their valiant temper</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Men lose when they incline to treachery;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then they fight like compell’d bears, would fly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were they not tied.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Kinsman, you might as well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak this, and act it in your glass, as to</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His ear which now disdains you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come up to me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quit me of these cold gyves, give me a sword,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though it be rusty, and the charity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of one meal lend me; come before me then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A good sword in thy hand, and do but say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Emily is thine, I will forgive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The trespass thou hast done me, yea, my life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If then thou carry’t; and brave souls in shades,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That have died manly, which will seek of me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some news from earth, they shall get none but this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou art brave and noble.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be content,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Again betake you to your hawthorn-house:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With counsel of the night, I will be here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With wholesome viands; these impediments</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will I file off; you shall have garments, and</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perfumes to kill the smell o’ the prison; after,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When you shall stretch yourself, and say but, “Arcite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am in plight,” there shall be at your choice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both sword and armour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O you heavens, dares any</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So noble bear a guilty business? none</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But only Arcite; therefore none but Arcite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In this kind is so bold.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Sweet Palamon⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do embrace you and your offer: for</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your offer do’t I only, sir; your person,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without hypocrisy, I may not wish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than my sword’s edge on’t. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Wind horns of cornets.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You hear the horns:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enter your musite, lest this match between’s</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be cross’d ere met. Give me your hand; farewell:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll bring you every needful thing: I pray you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take comfort, and be strong.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pray, hold your promise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do the deed with a bent brow: most certain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You love me not: be rough with me, and pour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This oil out of your language. By this air,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I could for each word give a cuff; my stomach</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not reconcil’d by reason.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Plainly spoken!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet pardon me hard language: when I spur</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My horse, I chide him not; content and anger</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In me have but one face. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Wind horns.</i> Hark, sir! they call</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The scatter’d to the banquet: you must guess</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have an office there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, your attendance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot please heaven; and I know your office</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unjustly is achiev’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ve a good title,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am persuaded: this question sick between’s,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My bleeding must be cur’d. I am a suitor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That to your sword you will bequeath this plea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And talk of it no more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But this one word:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’re going now to gaze upon my mistress;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For note you, mine she is⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Nay, then⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, pray you⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You talk of feeding me to breed me strength;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’re going now to look upon a sun</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That strengthens what it looks on; there you have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A vantage o’er me: but enjoy it till</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I may enforce my remedy. Farewell. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt severally.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Another part of the forest.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler’s</b> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He has mistook the brake I meant; is gone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After his fancy. ’Tis now well-nigh morning;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No matter: would it were perpetual night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And darkeness lord o’ the world!⁠—Hark! ’tis a wolf:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In me hath grief slain fear, and, but for one thing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I care for nothing, and that’s Palamon:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I reck not if the wolves would jaw me, so</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He had this file. What if I holla’d for him?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cannot holla: if I whooped, what then?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he not answer’d, I should call a wolf,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do him but that service. I have heard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strange howls this live-long night: why may’t not be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They have made prey of him? he has no weapons;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He cannot run; the jingling of his gyves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might call fell things to listen, who have in them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A sense to know a man unarm’d, and can</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Smell where resistance is. I’ll set it down</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He’s torn to pieces; they howl’d many together,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then they fed on him: so much for that!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be bold to ring the bell; how stand I, then?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All’s charr’d when he is gone. No, no, I lie;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father’s to be hang’d for his escape;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself to beg, if I priz’d life so much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As to deny my act; but that I would not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should I try death by dozens.⁠—I am mop’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Food took I none these two days⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sipp’d some water; I’ve not clos’d mine eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save when my lids scour’d off their brine. Alas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dissolve my life! let not my sense unsettle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest I should drown, or stab, or hang myself!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O state of nature, fail together in me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since thy best props are warp’d!⁠—So, which way now?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The best way is the next way to a grave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Each errant step beside is torment. Lo,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The moon is down, the crickets chirp, the screeching owl</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Calls in the dawn! all offices are done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save what I fail in: but the point is this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An end, and that is all. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same part of the forest as in scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>, with meat, wine, files, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>I should be near the place.⁠—Hoa, Cousin Palamon!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Arcite?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The same: I’ve brought you food and files.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come forth and fear not; here’s no Theseus.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Nor none so honest, Arcite.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That’s no matter:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll argue that hereafter. Come, take courage;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You shall not die thus beastly: here, sir, drink;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know you’re faint; then I’ll talk further with you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Arcite, thou mightst now poison me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I might;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I must fear you first. Sit down; and, good, now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more of these vain parleys: let us not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Having our ancient reputation with us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make talk for fools and cowards. To your health! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drinks.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pray, sit down, then; and let me entreat you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By all the honesty and honour in you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No mention of this woman! ’twill disturb us;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We shall have time enough.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Well, sir, I’ll pledge you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drinks.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Drink a good hearty draught; it breeds good blood, man.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do not you feel it thaw you?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stay; I’ll tell you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After a draught or two more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Spare it not;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The duke has more, coz. Eat now.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Yes. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Eats.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’m glad</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have so good a stomach.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am gladder</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have so good meat to’t.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is’t not mad lodging</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here in the wild woods, cousin?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, for them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That have wild consciences.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How tastes your victuals?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your hunger needs no sauce, I see.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not much:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if it did, yours is too tart, sweet cousin.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What is this?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Venison.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis a lusty meat.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me more wine: here, Arcite, to the wenches</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ve known in our days! The lord-steward’s daughter;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do you remember her?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>After you, coz.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>She lov’d a black-hair’d man.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>She did so: well, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>And I have heard some call him Arcite; and⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Out with it, faith!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>She met him in an arbour:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What did she there, coz? play o’ the virginals?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Something she did, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Made her groan a month for’t;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or two, or three, or ten.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The marshal’s sister</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had her share too, as I remember, cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Else there be tales abroad: you’ll pledge her?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Yes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A pretty brown wench ’tis: there was a time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When young men went a-hunting, and a wood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And a broad beech; and thereby hangs a tale.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Heigh-ho!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For Emily, upon my life! Fool,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away with this strain’d mirth! I say again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That sigh was breath’d for Emily: base cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dar’st thou break first?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>You’re wide.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By heaven and earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s nothing in thee honest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then I’ll leave you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are a beast now.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>As thou mak’st me, traitor.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There’s all things needful⁠—files, and shirts, and perfumes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll come again some two hours hence, and bring</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That that shall quiet all.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>A sword and armour?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fear me not. You are now too foul; farewell:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Get off your trinkets; you shall want nought.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Sirrah⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>I’ll hear no more. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>If he keep touch, he dies for’t. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Another part of the forest.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler’s</b> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am very cold; and all the stars are out too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The little stars, and all that look like aglets:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sun has seen my folly. Palamon!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alas, no! he’s in heaven.⁠—Where am I now?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yonder’s the sea, and there’s a ship; how’t tumbles!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there’s a rock lies watching under water;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, now, it beats upon it; now, now, now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s a leak sprung, a sound one; how they cry!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spoon her before the wind, you’ll lose all else;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Up with a course or two, and tack about, boys:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good night, good night; ye’re gone.⁠—I’m very hungry:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would I could find a fine frog! he would tell me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>News from all parts o’ the world; then would I make</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A careck of a cockle-shell, and sail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By east and north-east to the king of Pigmies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he tells fortunes rarely. Now, my father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Twenty to one, is truss’d up in a trice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-morrow morning: I’ll say never a word. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sings.</i></span>
								</p>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span>For I’ll cut my green coat a foot above my knee;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And I’ll clip my yellow locks an inch below mine e’e:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Hey, nonny, nonny, nonny.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>He s’ buy me a white cut, forth for to ride,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And I’ll go seek him through the world that is so wide:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Hey nonny, nonny, nonny.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
								<p>
									<span>O for a prick now, like a nightingale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To put my breast against! I shall sleep like a top else. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Another part of the forest.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</b>, four <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countrymen</b> as Morris-dancers, another as the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bavian</b>, five <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Wenches</b>, and a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Taborer</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fie, fie!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What tediosity and disensanity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is here among ye! Have my rudiments</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Been labour’d so long with ye, milk’d unto ye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, by a figure, even the very plum-broth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And marrow of my understanding laid upon ye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do you still cry “Where,” and “How,” and “Wherfore?”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You most coarse freeze capacities, ye jane judgements,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have I said “Thus let be,” and “There let be,”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And “Then let be,” and no man understand me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i xml:lang="la">Proh Deum, medius fidius</i>, ye are all dunces!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For why here stand I; here the duke comes; there are you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Close in the thicket; the duke appears; I meet him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And unto him I utter learned things</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And many figures; he hears, and nods, and hums,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then cries “Rare!” and I go forward; at length</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fling my cap up; mark there! then do you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As once did Meleager and the boar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Break comely out before him, like true lovers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cast yourselves in a body decently,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sweetly, by a figure, trace and turn, boys.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Countryman</td>
							<td>And sweetly we will do it, Master Gerrold.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Countryman</td>
							<td>Draw up the company. Where’s the taborer?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Countryman</td>
							<td>Why, Timothy!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Taborer</td>
							<td>Here, my mad boys; have at ye!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td>But I say where’s their women?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">4 Countryman</td>
							<td>Here’s Friz and Maudlin.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Countryman</td>
							<td>And little Luce with the white legs, and bouncing Barbary.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Countryman</td>
							<td>And freckled Nell, that never fail’d her master.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Where be your ribands, maids? swim with your bodies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And carry it sweetly and deliverly;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now and then a favour and a frisk.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nell</td>
							<td>Let us alone, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td>Where’s the rest o’ the music?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Countryman</td>
							<td>Dispers’d as you commanded.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Couple, then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And see what’s wanting. Where’s the Bavian?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My friend, carry your tail without offence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or scandal to the ladies; and be sure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You tumble with audacity and manhood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when you bark, do it with judgement.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bavian</td>
							<td>Yes, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td><i xml:lang="la">Quo usque tandem?</i> here’s a woman wanting.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">4 Countryman</td>
							<td>We may go whistle; all the fat’s i’ the fire.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We have,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As learned authors utter, wash’d a tile;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We have been <i xml:lang="la">fatuus</i>, and labour’d vainly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This is that scornful piece, that scurvy hilding,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That gave her promise faithfully she would</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be here, Cicely the sempster’s daughter:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The next gloves that I give her shall be dog-skin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, an she fail me once⁠—You can tell, Arcas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She swore, by wine and bread, she would not break.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>An eel and woman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A learned poet says, unless by the tail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with thy teeth thou hold, will either fail.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In manners this was false position.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Countryman</td>
							<td>A fire ill take her! does she flinch now?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall we determine, sir?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nothing;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our business is become a nullity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, and a woful and a piteous nullity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">4 Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, when the credit of our town lay on it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now to be frampal, now to piss o’ the nettle!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go thy ways; I’ll remember thee, I’ll fit thee!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler’s</b> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</b>, and sings.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span>The George, holla! came from the south,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">From the coast of Barbary-a;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And there he met with brave gallants of war,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">By one, by two, by three-a.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>Well hail’d, well hail’d, you jolly gallants!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And whither now are you bound-a?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>O, let me have your company</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Till I come to the Sound-a!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>There was three fools fell out about an howlet:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">The one said it was an owl;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">The other he said nay;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The third he said it was a hawk,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And her bells were cut away.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Countryman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There’s a dainty mad woman, master,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come i’ the nick; as mad as a March hare:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If we can get her dance, we’re made again;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I warrant her she’ll do the rarest gambols.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1 Countryman</td>
							<td>A mad woman! we are made, boys.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td>And are you mad, good woman?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’d be sorry else.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me your hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td>Why?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I can tell your fortune:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are a fool. Tell ten. I’ve pos’d him. Buzz!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Friend, you must eat no white bread; if you do,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your teeth will bleed extremely. Shall we dance, ho?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know you; you’re a tinker; sirrah tinker,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stop no more holes but what you should.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>
										<i xml:lang="la">Dii boni!</i>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A tinker, damsel!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Or a conjurer:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Raise me a devil now, and let him play</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i xml:lang="it">Qui passa</i> o’ the bells and bones.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, take her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fluently persuade her to a peace;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>
										<i xml:lang="la">Et opus exegi, quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignis⁠—</i>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strike up, and lead her in.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2 Countryman</td>
							<td>Come, lass, let’s trip it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</td>
							<td>I’ll lead.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3 Countryman</td>
							<td>Do, do. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Horns winded within.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Persuasively and cunningly; away, boys!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hear the horns: give me some meditation,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mark your cue. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all except <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</b>.</i> Pallas inspire me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>, and Train.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>This way the stag took.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td>Stay and edify.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>What have we here?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>Some country sport, upon my life, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, sir, go forward; we will edify.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ladies, sit down: we’ll stay it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td>Thou doughty duke, all hail! All hail, sweet ladies!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>This is a cold beginning.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If you but favour, our country pastime made is.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We are a few of those collected here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ruder tongues distinguish villager;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, to say verity and not to fable,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We are a merry rout, or else a rable.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or company, or, by a figure, choris,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ’fore thy dignity will dance a morris.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I, that am the rectifier of all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By title <i xml:lang="la">poedagogus</i>, that let fall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The birch upon the breeches of the small ones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And humble with a ferula the tall ones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do here present this machine, or this frame:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, dainty duke, whose doughty dismal fame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From Dis to Daedalus, from post to pillar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is blown abroad, help me, thy poor well-willer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, with thy twinkling eyes, look right and straight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon this mighty <em>morr</em>⁠—of mickle weight⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span><em>Is</em>⁠—now comes in, which being glu’d together</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes <em>morris</em>, and the cause that we came hether,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The body of our sport, of no small study.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I first appear, though rude and raw and muddy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To speak, before thy noble grace, this tenner;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At whose great feet I offer up my penner:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The next, the Lord of May and Lady bright,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Chambermaid and Servingman, by night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That seek out silent hanging: then mine Host</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And his fat spouse, that welcomes to their cost</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The galled traveller, and with a beck’ning</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Informs the tapster to inflame the reck’ning:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then the beast-eating Clown, and next the Fool,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Bavian, with long tail and eke long tool;</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i xml:lang="la">Cum multis aliis</i> that make a dance:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say “Ay,” and all shall presently advance.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>Ay, ay, by any means, dear domine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>Produce.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td><i xml:lang="la">Intrate, filii</i>; come forth, and foot it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter the school, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bavian</b>, five <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Wenches</b>, and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Taborer</b>, with the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gaoler’s</b> <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Daughter</b>, and others. They dance a morris.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ladies, if we have been merry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And have pleas’d ye with a derry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And a derry, and a down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say the schoolmaster’s no clown.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Duke, if we have pleas’d thee too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And have done as good boys should do,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give us but a tree or twain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For a Maypole, and again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere another year run out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll make thee laugh, and all this rout.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>Take twenty, domine.⁠—How does my sweetheart?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td>Never so pleas’d, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Twas an excellent dance; and for a preface,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I never heard a better.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Schoolmaster, I thank you.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One see ’em all rewarded.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And here’s something <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gives money.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>To paint your pole withal.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>Now to our sports again.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gerrold</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>May the stag thou hunt’st stand long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thy dogs be swift and strong!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May they kill him without lets,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the ladies eat his dowsets! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>, and Train. Horns winded as they go out.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, we’re all made. <i xml:lang="la">Dii Deoeque omnes!</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye have danc’d rarely, wenches. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same part of the forest as scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</b> from the bush.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>About this hour my cousin gave his faith</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To visit me again, and with him bring</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two swords and two good armours: if he fail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He’s neither man nor soldier. When he left me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I did not think a week could have restor’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lost strength to me, I was grown so low</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And crest-fall’n with my wants: I thank thee, Arcite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou’rt yet a fair foe; and I feel myself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With this refreshing, able once again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To outdure danger. To delay it longer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would make the world think, when it comes to hearing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I lay fatting like a swine, to fight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not a soldier: therefore, this blest morning</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall be the last; and that sword he refuses,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If it but hold, I kill him with; ’tis justice:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, love and fortune for me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</b>, with armours and swords.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>O, good morrow.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Good morrow, noble kinsman.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have put you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To too much pains, sir.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That too much, fair cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is but a debt to honour and my duty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Would you were so in all, sir! I could wish ye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As kind a kinsman as you force me find</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A beneficial foe, that my embraces</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might thank ye, not my blows.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I shall think either,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well done, a noble recompense.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Then I shall quit you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Defy me in these fair terms, and you show</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than a mistress to me: no more anger,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As you love anything that’s honourable:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We were not bred to talk, man; when we’re arm’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And both upon our guards, then let our fury,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like meeting of two tides, fly strongly from us;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then to whom the birthright of this beauty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Truly pertains⁠—without upbraidings, scorns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Despisings of our persons, and such poutings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fitter for girls and school-boys⁠—will be seen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And quickly, yours or mine. Will’t please you arm, sir?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, if you feel yourself not fitting yet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And furnish’d with your old strength, I’ll stay, cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And every day discourse you into health,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I am spar’d: your person I am friends with;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I could wish I had not said I lov’d her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though I had died; but, loving such a lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And justifying my love, I must not fly from’t.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Arcite, thou art so brave an enemy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That no man but thy cousin’s fit to kill thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’m well and lusty; choose your arms.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Choose you, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Wilt thou exceed in all, or dost thou do it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make me spare thee?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If you think so, cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are deceiv’d; for, as I am a soldier,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not spare you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>That’s well said.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>You’ll find it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, as I am an honest man, and love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With all the justice of affection,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll pay thee soundly. This I’ll take.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That’s mine, then.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll arm you first. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Proceeds to put on <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon’s</b> armour.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do. Pray thee, tell me, cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where gott’st thou this good armour?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis the duke’s;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, to say true, I stole’t. Do I pinch you?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>No.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Is’t not too heavy?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have worn a lighter;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I shall make it serve.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>I’ll buckle’t close.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>By any means.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>You care not for a grand-guard?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, no; we’ll use no horses: I perceive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’d fain be at that fight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>I am indifferent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Faith, so am I. Good cousin, thrust the buckle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through far enough.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>I warrant you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>My casque now.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Will you fight bare-arm’d?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>We shall be the nimbler.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But use your gauntlets though: those are o’ the least;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pr’ythee, take mine, good cousin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thank you, Arcite.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How do I look? am I fall’n much away?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Faith, very little; love has us’d you kindly.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>I’ll warrant thee I’ll strike home.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do, and spare not.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll give you cause, sweet cousin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now to you, sir.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methinks this armour’s very like that, Arcite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou wor’st that day the three kings fell, but lighter.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That was a very good one; and that day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I well remember, you outdid me, cousin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I never saw such valour: when you charg’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the left wing of the enemy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I spurr’d hard to come up, and under me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I had a right good horse.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You had indeed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A bright bay, I remember.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes. But all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was vainly labour’d in me; you outwent me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor could my wishes reach you: yet a little</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I did by imitation.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>More by virtue;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’re modest, cousin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>When I saw you charge first,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methought I heard a dreadful clap of thunder</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Break from the troop.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But still before that flew</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The lightning of your valour. Stay a little:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not this piece too straight?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>No, no; ’tis well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I would have nothing hurt thee but my sword;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A bruise would be dishonour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Now I’m perfect.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Stand off, then.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Take my sword; I hold it better.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I thank ye. No, keep it; your life lies on it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here’s one, if it but hold, I ask no more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all my hopes. My cause and honour guard me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>And me my love! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They bow several ways; then advance, and stand.</i> Is there aught else to say?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This only, and no more. Thou art mine aunt’s son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that blood we desire to shed is mutual;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In me thine, and in thee mine: my sword</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is in my hand, and, if thou killest me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gods and I forgive thee: if there be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A place prepar’d for those that sleep in honour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I wish his weary soul that falls may win it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fight bravely, cousin: give me thy noble hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here, Palamon: this hand shall never more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come near thee with such friendship.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>I commend thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If I fall, curse me, and say I was a coward;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For none but such dare die in these just trials.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once more, farewell, my cousin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Farewell, Arcite. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They fight. Horns winded within: they stand.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>Lo, cousin, lo! our folly has undone us.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Why?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This is the duke, a-hunting as I told you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If we be found, we’re wretched; O, retire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For honour’s sake and safety, presently</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into your bush again, sir; we shall find</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Too many hours to die in. Gentle cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you be seen, you perish instantly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For breaking prison; and I, if you reveal me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For my contempt: then all the world will scorn us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And say we had a noble difference,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But base disposers of it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, no, cousin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will no more be hidden, nor put off</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This great adventure to a second trial:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know your cunning and I know your cause:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He that faints now, shame take him! Put thyself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon thy present guard⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>You are not mad?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Or I will make th’ advantage of this hour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine own; and what to come shall threaten me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fear less than my fortune. Know, weak cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I love Emilia; and in that I’ll bury</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thee, and all crosses else.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, come what can come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt know, Palamon, I dare as well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Die, as discourse or sleep: only this fears me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The law will have the honour of our ends.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have at thy life!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>Look to thine own well, Arcite. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They fight. Horns winded within.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</b>, and Train.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What ignorant and mad malicious traitors</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are you, that, ’gainst the tenor of my laws,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are making battle, thus like knights appointed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without my leave, and officers of arms?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By Castor, both shall die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hold thy word, Theseus:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’re certainly both traitors, both despisers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of thee and of thy goodness: I am Palamon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That cannot love thee, he that broke thy prison;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think well what that deserves: and this is Arcite;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A bolder traitor never trod thy ground,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A falser ne’er seemed friend: this is the man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was begg’d and banish’d: this is he contemns thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what thou dar’st do; and in this disguise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against thy own edict, follows thy sister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That fortunate bright star, the fair Emilia;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose servant⁠—if there be a right in seeing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And first bequeathing of the soul to⁠—justly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am; and, which is more, dares think her his.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This treachery, like a most trusty lover,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I call’d him now to answer: if thou be’st,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thou art spoken, great and virtuous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The true decider of all injuries,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say “Fight again!” and thou shalt see me, Theseus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do such a justice thou thyself wilt envy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then take my life; I’ll woo thee to’t.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What more than man is this!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>I’ve sworn.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We seek not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy breath of mercy, Theseus: ’tis to me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A thing as soon to die as thee to say it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And no more mov’d. Where this man calls me traitor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me say thus much: if in love be treason,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In service of so excellent a beauty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I love most, and in that faith will perish,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I have brought my life here to confirm it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I have serv’d her truest, worthiest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I dare kill this cousin that denies it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So let me be most traitor, and ye please me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For scorning thy edict, duke, ask that lady</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why she is fair, and why her eyes command me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stay here to love her; and, if she say “traitor,”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am a villain fit to lie unburied.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou shalt have pity of us both, O Theseus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If unto neither thou show mercy; stop,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thou art just, thy noble ear against us;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thou art valiant: for thy cousin’s soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose twelve strong labours crown his memory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s die together, at one instant, duke;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Only a little let him fall before me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I may tell my soul he shall not have her.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I grant your wish; for, to say true, your cousin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Has ten times more offended, for I gave him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More mercy than you found, sir, your offences</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being no more then his.⁠—None here speak for ’em;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, ere the sun set, both shall sleep for ever.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, the pity!⁠—Now or never, sister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak, not to be denied: that face of yours</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will bear the curses else of after ages</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For these lost cousins.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In my face, dear sister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I find no anger to ’em, nor no ruin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The misadventure of their own eyes kill ’em:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet that I will be woman and have pity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My knees shall grow to the ground but I’ll get mercy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Help me, dear sister: in a deed so virtuous</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The powers of all women will be with us.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most royal brother⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They kneel.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td>Sir, by our tie of marriage⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>By your own spotless honour⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By that faith,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That fair hand, and that honest heart you gave me⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By that you would have pity in another,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By your own virtues infinite⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By valour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By all the chaste nights I have ever pleas’d you⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>These are strange conjurings.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, then, I’ll in too:⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kneels.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>By all our friendship, sir, by all our dangers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By all you love most, wars, and this sweet lady⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By that you would have trembled to deny</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A blushing maid⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By your own eyes, by strength,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In which you swore I went beyond all women,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Almost all men, and yet I yielded, Theseus⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To crown all this, by your most noble soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which cannot want due mercy, I beg first.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td>Next, hear my prayers.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>Last, let me entreat, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>For mercy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td>Mercy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>Mercy on these princes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye make my faith reel: say I felt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Compassion to ’em both, how would you place it?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td>Upon their lives; but with their banishments.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You’re a right woman, sister; you have pity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But want the understanding where to use it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you desire their lives, invent a way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Safer than banishment: can these two live,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And have the agony of love about ’em,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not kill one another? every day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They’d fight about you; hourly bring your honour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In public question with their swords. Be wise, then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here forget ’em; it concerns your credit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And my oath equally; I’ve said they die:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Better they fall by the law than one another.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bow not my honour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O my noble brother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That oath was rashly made, and in your anger;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your reason will not hold it: if such vows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand for express will, all the world must perish.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beside, I have another oath ’gainst yours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of more authority, I’m sure more love;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not made in passion neither, but good heed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>What is it, sister?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>Urge it home, brave lady.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That you would ne’er deny me anything</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fit for my modest suit and your free granting:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I tie you to your word now; if ye fall in’t,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think how you maim your honour⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For now I’m set a-begging, sir, I’m deaf</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To all but your compassion⁠—how their lives</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might breed the ruin of my name, opinion!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall anything that loves me perish for me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That were a cruel wisedom: do men proyne</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The straight young boughs that blush with thousand blossoms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because they may be rotten? O Duke Theseus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The goodly mothers that have groan’d for these,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the longing maids that ever lov’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If your vow stand, shall curse me and my beauty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in their funeral songs for these two cousins</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Despise my cruelty, and cry woe-worth me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till I am nothing but the scorn of women.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For heaven’s sake save their lives, and banish ’em.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>On what conditions?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Swear ’em never more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make me their contention or to know me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tread upon thy dukedom, and to be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherever they shall travel, ever strangers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To one another.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll be cut to pieces</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before I take this oath: forget I love her?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O all ye gods, dispise me, then. Thy banishment</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I not mislike, so we may fairly carry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our swords and cause along; else, never trifle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But take our lives, duke: I must love, and will;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for that love must and dare kill this cousin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On any piece the earth has.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Will you, Arcite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take these conditions?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>He’s a villain, then.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>These are men!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, never, duke; ’tis worse to me than begging,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To take my life so basely. Though I think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I never shall enjoy her, yet I’ll preserve</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The honour of affection, and die for her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make death a devil.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>What may be done? for now I feel compassion.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pirithous</td>
							<td>Let it not fall again, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Say, Emilia,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If one of them were dead, as one must, are you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Content to take the other to your husband?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They cannot both enjoy you: they are princes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As goodly as your own eyes, and as noble</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ever fame yet spoke of: look upon ’em,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if you can love, end this difference;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I give consent.⁠—Are you content too, princes?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="together">
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon<br/>
							Arcite</td>
							<td>With all our souls.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He that she refuses</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must die, then.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="together">
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon<br/>
							Arcite</td>
							<td>Any death thou canst invent, duke.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If I fall from that mouth, I fall with favour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lovers yet unborn shall bless my ashes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If she refuse me, yet my grave will wed me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And soldiers sing my epitaph.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>Make choice, then.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cannot, sir; they’re both too excellent:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For me, a hair shall never fall of these men.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td>What will become of ’em?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thus I ordaine it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, by mine honour, once again it stands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or both shall die.⁠—You shall both to your country;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And each, within this month, accompanied</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With three fair knights, appear again in this place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In which I’ll plant a pyramid; and whether,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before us that are here, can force his cousin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By fair and knightly strength to touch the pillar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He shall enjoy her; th’ other lose his head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all his friends; nor shall he grudge to fall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor think he dies with interest in this lady.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will this content ye?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes.⁠—Here, cousin Arcite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’m friends again till that hour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Arcite</td>
							<td>I embrace ye.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>Are you content, sister?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Emilia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes; I must, sir;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Else both miscarry.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, shake hands again, then;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And take heed, as you’re gentlemen, this quarrel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sleep till the hour prefix’d, and hold your course.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Palamon</td>
							<td>We dare not fail thee, Theseus.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, I’ll give ye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now usage like to princes and to friends.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When ye return, who wins, I’ll settle here;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who loses, yet I’ll weep upon his bier. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
