<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Prologue</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="prologue" epub:type="prologue z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Prologue</h2>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>New plays and maidenheads are near akin;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Much follow’d both, for both much money gi’en,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If they stand sound and well: and a good play,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose modest scenes blush on his marriage-day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And shake to lose his honour, is like her</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That after holy tie and first night’s stir,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet still is modesty, and still retains</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More of the maid to sight than husband’s pains.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We pray our play may be so; for I’m sure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It has a noble breeder and a pure,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A learned, and a poet never went</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More famous yet ’twixt Po and silver Trent:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Chaucer, of all admir’d, the story gives;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There constant to eternity it lives.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If we let fall the nobleness of this,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the first sound this child hear be a hiss,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How will it shake the bones of that good man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And make him cry from under ground, “O, fan</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From me the witless chaff of such a writer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That blasts my bays, and my fam’d works makes lighter</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than Robin Hood!” This is the fear we bring;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For, to say truth, it were an endless thing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And too ambitious, to aspire to him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Weak as we are, and almost breathless swim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In this deep water. Do but you hold out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your helping hands, and we shall tack about,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And something do to save us: you shall hear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Scenes, though below his art, may yet appear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Worth two hours’ travel. To his bones sweet sleep!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Content to you!⁠—If this play do not keep</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A little dull time from us, we perceive</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our losses fall so thick, we must needs leave. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
